First draft for Shelby's blog post! (#532)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/updating-to-cpp11/index.Rmd

date: 2021-09-10
author: Shelby Bearrows
description: >
    The cpp11 summer intern reviews the process they used to convert readxl to using 
    cpp11.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/9MMd2uRpfvc
  author: John Salzarulo

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", or "other"
categories: [learn] 
tags: [cpp11, internship]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [ ] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [ ] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [ ] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [ ] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [x] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [x] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [x] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

Over the summer I had the pleasure of working with Jim Hester on the cpp11 package as a tidyverse summer intern. The cpp11 package is a header-only R package that helps R package developers handle R objects with C++ code. Its goals and syntax are similar to the excellent Rcpp package.

> During most of my internship, I worked on triaging issue requests, fixing bugs and adding new features to cpp11. Near the end of the summer, I got to work with Jenny Bryan on converting the readxl package from using Rcpp to using cpp11.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During most of my internship, I worked on triaging issues, fixing bugs, and adding new features to cpp11. Near the end of the summer, I got to work with Jenny Bryan on converting the readxl package from using Rcpp to using cpp11.
```

> Jim has written a [great post](https://cpp11.r-lib.org/articles/converting.html) about converting packages from Rcpp to cpp11 which I heavily referenced during the process . But there were still some challenges I encountered. To help others going through a similar process, I wanted to review the workflows and tools we used to make this easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jim has written a [great post](https://cpp11.r-lib.org/articles/converting.html) about converting packages from Rcpp to cpp11, which I heavily referenced during the process . But there were still some challenges I encountered. To help others going through a similar process, I wanted to review the workflows and tools we used to make this easier.
```

## Where to start?
 

> To get started, I followed the initial set-up steps outlined in Jim’s article and then recompiled, to confirm it was successful. Next, I needed to include either the cpp11/R.hpp header or the macros R_NO_REMAP and STRICT_R_HEADERS. I found it easier to include the macros since the header file needs to come before any headers that use Rcpp. As for which file to start with, I’d suggest starting from any header or C++ file that is the most self-contained. Initially, I made the mistake of selecting the most interconnected file in the readxl package! Since this file was central to the package, I would have had to convert the entire package over to cpp11 before the compilation errors would stop. After Jim and Jenny helped me select a more approachable file, the process was more incremental and I successfully maintained my sanity 🙌🏼.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, I followed the initial set-up steps outlined in Jim’s article and then recompiled, to confirm it was successful. Next, I needed to include either the `cpp11/R.hpp` header or the macros `R_NO_REMAP` and `STRICT_R_HEADERS`. I found it easier to include the macros since the header file needs to come before any headers that use Rcpp. As for which file to start with, I’d suggest starting from any header or C++ file that is the most self-contained. Initially, I made the mistake of selecting the most interconnected file in the readxl package! Since this file was central to the package, I would have had to convert the entire package over to cpp11 before the compilation errors would stop. After Jim and Jenny helped me select a more approachable file, the process was more incremental and I successfully maintained my sanity 🙌🏼.
```

This section / paragraph implicitly sends the message "we're going to approach this task incrementally, one file at a time", but I think it would be nice to say that explicitly at that start. Maybe the section header should also change accordingly.

I think this mindset, and the idea of moving file-by-file, keeping everything "green" (in the "tests pass" sense), is a big nugget of wisdom in this post. You might also want to mention the points at which you would make a commit and push (and get full CI).

Author: Love this! Great idea

## The nitty gritty

> For the nitty gritty details of converting the code, I definitely took advantage of the table in Jim’s post! That comparison table is great for converting between Rcpp and cpp11 classes. Also, I had to keep track of whether an object was writable or readable. This new feature in cpp11 is great since writable vectors are costly because the data must be fully copied, so using readable where appropriate is a good idea. When I was unsure of whether an object should be readable or writable, I would make it readable and then recompile to see if I was correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the nitty gritty details of converting the code, I definitely took advantage of [the table in Jim’s post](https://cpp11.r-lib.org/articles/converting.html#class-comparison-table-1)! That comparison table is great for converting between Rcpp and cpp11 classes. Also, I had to keep track of whether an object was writable or readable. This new feature in cpp11 is great, since writable vectors are costly because the data must be fully copied, so using readable where appropriate is a good idea. When I was unsure of whether an object should be readable or writable, I would make it readable and then recompile to see if I was correct.
```

> After I finished converting a file, I recompiled, ran my tests and fixed any compilation errors or test failures. This sometimes meant I had to edit other functions in other files but I only edited files enough to fix the failures. If I did too much it was difficult for me to know what’s causing the test failures. Another incremental approach I used was to convert one function in a file, and then test. This approach worked best for large files. I’d move on to the next file or function only after all my tests were passing again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After I finished converting a file, I recompiled, ran my tests and fixed any compilation errors or test failures. This sometimes meant I had to edit other functions in other files, but I only edited files enough to fix the failures. If I did too much it was difficult for me to know what was causing the test failures. Another incremental approach I used was to convert one function in a file, and then test. This approach worked best for large files. I’d move on to the next file or function only after all my tests were passing again.
```

Re: "my" tests

I think this wording is ambiguous, as it leaves me wondering if you have special Rcpp --> cpp11 conversation tests or does this mean you ran the existing tests in the package?

Author: I think I've made this clearer now but let me know if it still needs work.

Reviewer: Yeah, it's good. I've mark as resolved.

## Almost done

> Then, when I converted all the objects to cpp11,  I removed any stray #include "Rcpp.h" directives and ran devtools::check() to check for any other updates that might be required, like in the DESCRIPTION files. And that’s it!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, when I converted all the objects to cpp11,  I removed any stray `#include "Rcpp.h"` directives and ran `devtools::check()` to check for any other updates that might be required, such as in the DESCRIPTION file. And that’s it!
```

    cpp11.

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/9MMd2uRpfvc
  author: John Salzarulo

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", or "other"
categories: [learn] 
tags: [cpp11, internship]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [x] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [x] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [x] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [x] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [x] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [x] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [x] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [x] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

Over the summer I had the pleasure of working with Jim Hester on the [cpp11 package](https://cpp11.r-lib.org/) as a tidyverse summer intern.
The cpp11 package is a header-only R package that helps R package developers handle R objects with C++ code.
Its goals and syntax are similar to the excellent Rcpp package.
During most of my internship, I worked on triaging issues, fixing bugs, and adding new features to cpp11.

> Near the end of the summer, I got to work with Jenny Bryan on converting the [readxl](https://github.com/tidyverse/readxl/pull/659) package from using Rcpp to using cpp11.

Author: I included the readxl PR here!

Reviewer: Aha, I see. I think this is a case where it's too easy for a reader to mis-appreciate what that hyperlink goes to. I definitely assumed it went to the readxl pkgdown site (reading quickly). I think the link to the readxl PR should explicitly labelled as such in the prose. I think the two PR hyperlinks (readxl and readr) should appear together, for maximum impact.

Here's a good article on how people process hyperlinks and the implications for usability:

https://heyoka.medium.com/dont-use-click-here-f32f445d1021

Author: Thanks, I'll read over this and make adjustments!

Next, I needed to include either the `cpp11/R.hpp` header or the macros `R_NO_REMAP` and `STRICT_R_HEADERS`.
I found it easier to include the macros since the header file needs to come before any headers that use Rcpp.

## Step-by-step integration

After I'd set-up my environment it was time to start converting the files.
Initially, I made the mistake of selecting the most interconnected file in the readxl package.
Since this file was central to the package, I would have had to convert the entire package over to cpp11 before the compilation errors would stop.
After Jenny and Jim helped me select a more approachable file, the process was more incremental and I successfully maintained my sanity 🙌.

After I finished converting a file, I recompiled, ran the tests for the readxl package and fixed any compilation errors or test failures.
Sometimes I had to edit other functions in other files, but I only edited files enough to fix the failures.
If I did too much it was difficult for me to know what was causing the test failures.
Another incremental approach I used was to convert one function in a file, and then rerun the tests.
This approach worked best for larger files.

> Once the tests were passing, I'd commit and push to the PR so that my gracious reviewers could review my changes.
> This helped me maintain continuous integration and also helped my mentors review my code in stages, rather than in one, big batch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the tests were passing, I'd commit and push to the PR so that my gracious reviewers could review my changes in stages, rather than in one big batch.
This also allowed me to benefit from continuous integration, i.e. my changes were checked on a greater variety of R versions and operating systems, thanks to the checks we run via GitHub Actions.
```
```suggestion
Once the tests were passing, I'd commit and push to the PR so that my gracious reviewers could review my changes.
This helped me maintain continuous integration and also helped my mentors review my code in stages, rather than in one, big batch.
```

It's a win-win!

## The nitty-gritty

For the nitty-gritty details of converting the code, I definitely took advantage of [the table in Jim’s post](https://cpp11.r-lib.org/articles/converting.html#class-comparison-table-1)!
That comparison table is great for converting between Rcpp and cpp11 classes.
Also, I had to keep track of whether an object was writable or readable.
This new feature in cpp11 is great, since writable vectors are costly because the data must be fully copied, so using readable where appropriate is a good idea.
When I was unsure of whether an object should be readable or writable, I would make it readable and then recompile to see if I was correct.

## Almost done

Then, when I converted all the objects to cpp11,  I removed any stray `#include "Rcpp.h"` directives and ran `devtools::check()` to check for any other updates that might be required, such as in the DESCRIPTION file.
And that’s it!

I had so much fun working with the tidyverse team.
And a big thank you to Jim for all the support over the summer and to Jenny for their help on readxl!

> If you're looking for more examples of updating packages to using cpp11, Jim has also gone through the process with [readr](https://github.com/tidyverse/readr/pull/1109).

Reviewer: Is the readxl conversion PR linked in this post? I don't think so, but maybe I'm just missing it.
